---
layout: post
title:  "Initial Research & Justification"
date:   2025-02-06 00:16:00 -0500
author: Dee Schaedler
---
It turns out, starting a Housing Cooperative is Hard.

In late 2024, my parents offered to sell me their investment property. I was pretty estatic, and could barely afford it, but started looking into the process. Then I had a thought. "What if I could use my down payment to buy a house for multiple people instead". This got my mind spiraling.

Problems:
- Buying or Renting is expensive.
- Housing as an investment will not improve the availability of housing for anyone.
- Traditional Condos or Cooperatives can still be used as an investment, or have onerous restrictions on inhabitants.

I knew that I needed something non-profit, but I'm a bit of a control freak and worried about people taking over the cooperative, and converting it into a bad HOA or just using it for profit. Then I learned about Limited Equity Cooperatives.

> A limited equity cooperative (LEC) is a homeownership model in which residents purchase a share in a development (rather than an individual unit) and commit to resell their share at a price determined by formula—an arrangement that maintains affordability at purchase and over the long term.
>
> [localhousingsolutions.org](https://localhousingsolutions.org/housing-policy-library/limited-equity-cooperatives/)

This seems perfect! A pre-established structure for this thing means that people aren't just subject to my weird brain and whims. What do I need to do next?

> The LEC may be initiated by a nonprofit sponsor, who redevelops a property and sells shares to new members, or through the conversion of an existing rental property by current tenants.

I have neither a nonprofit sponsor, nor an existing rental property. This is going to get complicated, isn't it?

> Form a Board of Directors from the residents’ community with membership, finance, maintenance, and operations/management committees.
>
> [How to start a housing co-op - Mira Luna](https://www.shareable.net/how-to-start-a-housing-co-op/)

Oh No.

> The articles of incorporation constitute the legal document that establishes the cooperative as a
> business entity, subject to the laws of the state in which the co-op is chartered. The articles state the
> name under which the co-op will operate and the purpose of the corporation (which is to provide
> housing to its members). The articles are the backbone of the co-op and can be difficult to amend.
>
> [Cooperative Housing Toolbox](https://www.nasco.coop/sites/default/files/srl/Housing_Toolbox_Practical_guide_for_success.pdf)

Oh No.

So... This is pretty much where I'm at. It seems like I need a non-profit organization incorporated in order to start creating a coop. However, without a property to start the co-op in, it seems useless to create a non-profit organization. There's a little bit of a chicken and egg problem.

I can do the paperwork required to create a non-profit organization. But it's just me. I'm just some schmuck with an idea. I'm just an ADHD person who doesn't want to do all of this paperwork. I am a control freak who will obsess over all of this, given the opportunity.

I suppose the next step though is to review the requirements for creating a non-profit. If it's just a fee and some paperwork, great. If I need to make a whole business plan, that's going to take a while. If I need to write articles of incorporation and form a Board of Directors and management committees. That's going to take a long time. I will need people behind me. Strangers who happen to support my goals. Legal professionals, and developers, and accountants, and...

It's overwhelimg is all.

Let's lay out some goals.

- Use my personal capital to improve the housing crisis for as many people as possible.
- Create a non-profit organization to hold and govern any property obtained by the cooperative.
- Define the structure of the organization, legal framework, and rules.
- Have the non-profit aquire property.
- Have the non-profit run the property at or near cost.
- Aquire additional property when possible.

Can I do all of this? Maybe. Will I try? Probably. Will I get burnt out? Almost Certainly. But hopefully by that point, I will have convinced some people that this is worthwhile, and they can keep this going.

Raise a glass to the future.

Dee Schaedler  
deeschaedler@gmail.com  
